docs: dirty ancilla & uncompute spec (#93)
LEQO-Framework/leqo-backend: docs/usage/annotations.rst

    The `whole line <https://openqasm.com/language/directives.html#annotations#:~:text=continue%20to%20the%20end%20of%20the%20line>`_ will be interpreted like an annotation.
    Therefore you cannot use inline-comments on annotations!

> .. input-anker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _input-anker:

```

.. note::
    Even if the reusable alias is not used in code, an alias must be defined to mark qubits as reusable.
    The identifier is insignificant.

Dirty Ancilla Qubits
--------------------

> If qubits are used in a program and are neither marked as output nor reusable, they are considered dirty ancilla qubits thereafter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If qubits are used in a program and are neither marked as output nor reusable, they are considered dirty ancilla qubits.
```

These qubits may be in an arbitrary state, including entanglement with other qubits, and require the explicit `@leqo.dirty` annotation to indicate their intended use in another snippet.
A dirty ancilla may be promoted to a reusable ancilla via an associated uncomputation block.

> To use dirty ancillae within a snippet, the programmer must explicitly opt in by annotating the qubit definition with `@leqo.dirty`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use dirty ancillas within a snippet, the programmer must explicitly opt in by annotating the qubit definition with `@leqo.dirty`.
```

Author: "ancillae"  is actually the correct plural form of "ancilla" see [Wiktonary](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ancilla)

Reviewer: Oh nice, I didn't known that 😅

* The `@leqo.dirty` annotation follows the same implementation rules as input definitions, but omits indexing, as defined in :ref:`input definition <input-anker>`

.. warning::
    The state of a dirty ancilla qubit can be altered temporarily but must be restored at the end of a snippet.
    Therefore measuring a dirty qubit is not permitted.

.. code-block:: openqasm3
    :linenos:

    // Single dirty ancilla
    @leqo.dirty
    qubit singleDirtyAncilla;

.. code-block:: openqasm3
    :linenos:

    // Dirty ancilla array
    @leqo.dirty
    qubit[<<length>>] dirtyAncillaArray;

Uncomputation

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: Did you set the level of this heading intentionally?
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7d68230d-306f-400e-bd63-c0f5336584d3)

QASM 3

> ^^^^^^

Reviewer: We can probably remove this heading

When dirty ancilla qubits can be uncomputed, the programmer may provide an explicit uncomputation block to reverse their effects.
This is done using the `@leqo.uncompute` annotation, which defines a scoped region that is disabled by default via an `if (false)` statement.
The compiler may override this value to `true` if uncomputation of the associated dirty ancillae is required.

> * The `@leqo.uncompute` annotation must appear directly above a `if (false)` statement with a block body that must not be followed by an `else` statement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `@leqo.uncompute` annotation must appear directly above an `if (false)` statement with a block body that must not be followed by an `else` statement
```

* `@leqo.uncompute` annotations may appear multiple times in a program, each time referring to different uncomputation logic
* Nested `@leqo.uncompute` if-blocks are not allowed
* The `@leqo.uncompute` block must reverse all transformations on the associated ancillae, removing entanglement and restoring each to the |0⟩ state
* `@leqo.uncompute` blocks only operate on existing variables, qubits or selfdeclared aliases
* A `@leqo.uncompute` if-block must declare the uncomputed ancillae as reusable qubits by using the corresponding `@leqo.reusable` annotation

.. warning::
    Qubits previously annotated with `@leqo.dirty` must not be uncomputed

.. note::
    Not all operations are reversible; in such cases, the qubit should not be reused.

.. code-block:: openqasm3

>     :linenos:
>     @leqo.uncompute

Reviewer: Add a newline to make this block visible
```suggestion
    :linenos:

    @leqo.uncompute
```

    if (false) {

>         someUncomputeOperation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // some uncompute operation
```

        @leqo.reusable
        let reusable1 = dirtyAncilla1
    }

QASM 2
^^^^^^
Since annotations are not supported in QASM 2.x, uncomputation blocks must be delimited using single-line comments.
The start and end of the uncompute block are marked explicitly, as shown below:

.. code-block:: openqasm2

>     :linenos:
>     // @leqo.uncompute start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :linenos:

    // @leqo.uncompute start
```

    someUncomputeOperation

>     @leqo.reusable

Reviewer: This should also be a comment

    let reusable1 = dirtyAncilla1

>     // @leqo.uncompute end

Reviewer: We might want to move this to a new file and explain how out annotation-comments work in qasm2

.. note::
    Even if the reusable alias is not used in code, an alias must be defined to mark qubits as reusable.
    The identifier is insignificant.

Entangled & Dirty Ancillae
--------------------------
If qubits are used within a snippet and are not annotated with either ``@leqo.output`` or ``@leqo.reusable``,
they are treated by that snippet as entangled ancillae.
Subsequent snippets interpret these qubits as dirty ancillae.
Dirty ancillae may exist in an arbitrary quantum state, potentially entangled with other qubits,

> and must be explicitly annotated with ``@leqo.dirty`` to signify their intentional reuse in a snippet.

Reviewer 2: maybe point out, that this is a reuse **as an input**, [for which the snippet consuming the dirty ancilla needs to opt in with the annotation]

To use dirty ancillae within a snippet, the programmer must explicitly opt in by annotating the qubit declaration with ``@leqo.dirty``.

* The ``@leqo.dirty`` annotation follows the same implementation rules as input definitions, but omits indexing, as defined in :ref:`input definition <input-anker>`

.. warning::
    The state of a dirty ancilla qubit can be altered temporarily but must be restored at the end of a snippet.

>     Therefore measuring or uncompute a dirty qubit is not permitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Therefore measuring or uncompute operations on a dirty qubit are not permitted.
```

.. code-block:: openqasm3
    :linenos:

    // Single dirty ancilla
    @leqo.dirty
    qubit singleDirtyAncilla;

.. code-block:: openqasm3
    :linenos:

    // Dirty ancilla array
    @leqo.dirty
    qubit[<<length>>] dirtyAncillaArray;

Uncomputation
-------------

> When modified clean ancillae or linking qubits can be uncomputed, the programmer may provide an explicit uncomputation block to reverse their effects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When modified clean ancillae or linking qubits can be uncomputed, the programmer may provide an explicit uncomputation block to allow for safe reuse of those qubits.
```

This is done using the ``@leqo.uncompute`` annotation, which defines a scoped region that is disabled by default via an ``if (false)`` statement.
The compiler may override this statement to ``true`` if uncomputation of the associated qubits is determined to be necessary.

A qubit annotated with ``@leqo.reusable`` within such a block is referred to as an uncomputable ancilla.

* The ``@leqo.uncompute`` annotation must appear directly above an ``if (false)`` statement with a block body that must not be followed by an ``else`` statement
* ``@leqo.uncompute`` annotations may appear multiple times in a program, each time referring to different uncomputation logic
* Nested ``@leqo.uncompute`` if-blocks are not allowed
* A ``@leqo.uncompute`` if-block must be declared at global scope

> * The ``@leqo.uncompute`` block must reverse all transformations on the associated qubit, removing entanglement and restoring each to the ``|0⟩`` state

Reviewer 2: Could this be relaxed to "All uncompute blocks together must ..." since multiple blocks are allowed?

* ``@leqo.uncompute`` blocks only operate on existing variables, qubits or selfdeclared aliases
* A ``@leqo.uncompute`` if-block must declare the uncomputed ancillae as reusable qubits by using the corresponding ``@leqo.reusable`` annotation

.. warning::

>     Qubits previously annotated with ``@leqo.dirty`` must not be uncomputed

Reviewer 2: This might be impossible to track reliably, as qubit states can be swapped any time with a swap operation between qubits. A swap between two qubits has the same effect as switching the qubit identifiers.

Author: You're absolutely right to highlight this! We're not performing any form of semantic code analysis, and we don’t currently plan to track qubit states through swaps or other forms of dynamic remapping. The annotations in our system are strictly identifier-based - they attach to variable names, not to the underlying quantum states.

That said, I still believe the warning is appropriate and necessary. According to the definition of a dirty ancilla:

> The state of a dirty ancilla qubit can be altered temporarily but must be restored at the end of a snippet.

This implies that any identifier declared as a dirty ancilla must refer to a qubit that satisfies the same state constraints at both the start and end of the snippet. Since we can’t verify whether this holds (due to the identifier-only tracking), it becomes the responsibility of the user (providing custom code) or the enricher to ensure that the code meets the specification's requirements.

Would it be helpful if we extended the specification to clarify that tracking is purely identifier-based, and that no qubit-level analysis is performed?

Reviewer 2: You could include/clarify, that this property is not enforced by your backend. However, the feedback here was mostly to prevent a fruitless implementation effort.

.. note::

>     Not all operations are reversible; in such cases, the qubit should not be annotated as reusable.

Reviewer 2: All quantum operations are per definition reversible (though an uncompute might still be hard). And, of course, measuremments are not reversible.
